+++
title = "I2C vs SPI Serial Communication" 
date = "2023-07-16T15:19:21-07:00"
# description = "Comparing I2C and SPI"

tags = ["engineering","communication",]
+++

# Introduction

In this article, we will explore differences in I2C and SPI serial communication protocols.


# I2C Overview

I2C or Inter-Integrated Circuit, is a multi-master, multi-slave serial communication protocol that uses two wires: SDA (serial data) and SCL (serial clock). It allows multiple devices to be connected on the same bus, and each device has a unique address. It is commonly used for communication between sensors, displays, EEPROMs, and other peripherals.

The clock line is essential for ensuring proper timing and coordination during communication.

The I2C protocol is a synchronous serial communication protocol, which means that data is transmitted in a synchronized manner between the devices involved. Unlike asynchronous protocols like UART, I2C relies on a shared clock signal to coordinate the timing of data transmission.

Here's how the clock line works in I2C communication:

Master-Slave Relationship: In an I2C bus, there is a master device that initiates the communication and one or more slave devices that respond to the master's commands.

Master Controls the Clock: The master device generates the clock signal and controls the timing of the data transfer. It drives the clock line (SCL) by toggling it between high and low states according to a predetermined clock frequency.

Synchronized Data Transfer: When the clock line is high (idle state), both the master and slave devices can transmit or receive data. However, the actual data transfer occurs during the transitions of the clock line.

Data Validity on Clock Transitions: When the clock line transitions from high to low (falling edge), both the master and slave devices sample the data line (SDA) to read the bit value. On the rising edge of the clock line, the devices should have stabilized the data on the data line for the other device to read.

Bit-by-Bit Transfer: The bits of data are transferred one by one, synchronized to the clock signal. The clock line ensures that both the transmitting and receiving devices are in sync and can accurately interpret the transmitted data.

By having a dedicated clock line, I2C allows for multiple devices to share the same bus and ensures that data transfers are synchronized and reliable. It simplifies the communication protocol and makes it easier to implement in hardware.

Having a shared clock line also means that the devices on the I2C bus need to adhere to the same clock frequency. The clock frequency is typically defined by the master device and determines the speed of communication on the bus.

We will use the Arduino AVR source code to explore the protocol and go through some examples. Locally on macOS, you can find the source code at `~/Library/Arduino15/packages/arduino/hardware/avr/1.8.6/libraries/Wire/src`. 

Or, you can find the source code online at the Arduino Repo link down below under the Sources section.


### Sources

[Arduino Docs](https://docs.arduino.cc/learn/communication/wire)
[Arduino Repo](https://github.com/arduino/ArduinoCore-avr/tree/master/libraries/Wire/src)


```
> tree .config/nvim 
.config/nvim
├── README.md
├── init.lua
├── lua
│   └── plugins.lua
└── plugin
    ├── colors.lua
    ├── packer_compiled.lua
    ├── telescope.lua
    └── treesitter.lua
```
